
--- PAGE 1 ---
Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Soft Computing
j ourna  l h o mepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/asoc
Trafﬁc  sign detection and recognition based on random forests
Ayoub Ellahyani∗, Mohamed El Ansari, Ilyas El Jaafari
LabSIV, Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science, Ibn Zohr University, BP 8106, 80000 Agadir, Morocco
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received
 15
 June 2015
Received in revised form
23
 December 2015
Accepted
 31 December 2015
Available
 online 27 February 2016
Keywords:
Trafﬁc
 sign detection
Trafﬁc
 sign recognition
Color
 segmentation
Random
 forests
Support
 vector machines (SVMs)
Histogram
 of oriented gradients (HOG)
Local
 self-similarity (LSS)
a b s t r a c t
In this paper we present a new trafﬁc  sign detection and recognition (TSDR) method, which is achieved in
three
 main steps. The ﬁrst  step segments the image based on thresholding of HSI color space components.
The
 second step detects trafﬁc  signs by processing the blobs extracted by the ﬁrst  step. The last one
performs
 the recognition of the detected trafﬁc  signs. The main contributions of the paper are as follows.
First,
 we propose, in the second step, to use invariant geometric moments to classify shapes instead of
machine
 learning algorithms. Second, inspired by the existing features, new ones have been proposed
for
 the recognition. The histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) features has been extended to the HSI
color
 space and combined with the local self-similarity (LSS) features to get the descriptor we use in our
algorithm.
 As a classiﬁer,  random forest and support vector machine (SVM) classiﬁers  have been tested
together
 with the new descriptor. The proposed method has been tested on both the German Trafﬁc  Sign
Detection
 and Recognition Benchmark and the Swedish Trafﬁc  Signs Data sets. The results obtained are
satisfactory
 when compared to the state-of-the-art methods.
©
 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) play an impor-
tant role in enhancing car safety and driving comfort. One of the
most important difﬁculties  that ADAS face is the understanding
of the environment and guidance of the vehicles in real outdoor
scenes [1]. Humans driving is a task based almost entirely on visual
information, and one of the tasks in successful driving involves
the identiﬁcation  of trafﬁc  signs. Trafﬁc  signs provide informa-
tion about the current state of the road, restrictions, prohibitions,
warnings, and other helpful information for navigation. The infor-
mation provided by the road signs is encoded in their visual traits:
shape, color and pictogram.
Road sign recognition has been a challenge problem for many
years and is an important task not only for ADAS, but also for
other real-world applications including urban scene understand-
ing, automated driving, or even sign monitoring for maintenance.
It is a relatively constrained problem in the sense that signs are
unique, rigid, intended to be clearly visible for drivers, and have lit-
tle variability in appearance Fig. 1. However, there are many factors
that make the road sign recognition problem difﬁcult  such as:
∗ Corresponding
 author. Tel.: +212 672956896.
E-mail addresses: ayoub.ellahyani@gmail.como,
rellahyani.ayoub@edu.uiz.ac.ma (A. Ellahyani), m.elansari@uiz.ac.ma,
melansari@gmail.com (M.E. Ansari), eljaafari.ilyas@gmail.com (I.E. Jaafari).
• The
 colors of road signs, particularly red, may fade after long
exposure to the sun Fig. 1(a).
• Air pollution and weather conditions (e.g. rain, snow, fog, shad-
ows, and clouds) may decrease the visibility of road signs Fig. 1(b).
• Outdoor lighting conditions varying from day to night may affect
the colors of road signs Fig. 1(c).
• Obstacles, such as vehicles, pedestrians, and other road signs, may
partially occlude road signs Fig. 1 (d).
• Video images of road signs will have motion blur if the camcorder
is mounted on a moving vehicle due to vehicle vibration as well
as motion Fig. 1(e).
In
 this paper, we present a new trafﬁc  sign detection and recog-
nition approach including three stages. The ﬁrst  stage segments
the images to extract ROIs. The segmentation is usually performed
based on the color information, which is known a priori [2–5] . The
second one detects trafﬁc  shapes. Given that the geometric form of
trafﬁc  signs is limited to triangular, circular, rectangular and octag-
onal forms, the geometric information is used to identify trafﬁc
shapes from ROIs provided by the ﬁrst  stage. Most of authors use
machine learning algorithms such as SVMs and neural networks
(NNs) to classify shapes provided by the segmentation step [5–7] .
In this paper, we propose to use the invariant geometric moments
with a simple metric to match the ROIs provided by the segmen-
tation process with triangular, circular and rectangular shapes. It
gives better results in a lower processing time compared to machine
learning algorithms.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2015.12.041
1568-4946/© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
--- PAGE 2 ---
806 A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815
Fig. 1. Examples for difﬁculties  facing the trafﬁc  sign recognition (TSR) task.
The third stage recognizes the trafﬁc  signs based on the informa-
tion included in their pictograms. The new method constitutes an
improvement of the one presented recently in [8] where grey level-
based HOG features have been used instead of HSI-based ones,
which are adopted in the current work. Thus, we integrated the
color information into the HOG features by using the HSI com-
ponents to compute the descriptor instead of gray-scale images.
Moreover, in this work, we combined the HOG features computed
from the HSI color space with the LSS features to form a new
descriptor. These features were provided to the Random Forest
classiﬁer  to perform the recognition.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
an overview of past work on trafﬁc  sign detection and recognition.
Section 3 details the proposed approach to trafﬁc  sign detection
and recognition. Experimental results are illustrated in Section 4.
Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Related work
Many different approaches to trafﬁc  sign recognition have been
proposed and it is difﬁcult  to compare between those approaches
since they are based on different data. Moreover, some articles con-
centrate on subclasses of signs, for example on speed limit signs
and digit recognition. Regarding the detection problem, different
approaches have been proposed. In the older studies, e.g. [2,6], as
well as in many recent ones, e.g. [9–12] , it was common to employ
color segmentation [2–4,13,5] . Some authors perform this directly
in RGB (Red Green Blue) space, even if it is very sensitive to illu-
mination changes. To overcome this, simple formulas relating red,
green and blue components are employed. For example, Escalera
et al. in [2] used different relations between the R, G and B compo-
nents to segment the desired color. In [3] the difference between R
and G, and the difference between R and B channels are employed
to form two stable features in trafﬁc  sign detection. Ruta et al. in
[4], used the color enhancement to extract red, blue and yellow
blobs. This transform emphasizes the pixels where the given color
channel is dominant over the other two in the RGB color space.
In addition to RGB space other color spaces such as YUV and HSI
are also used. For example, The YUV system is considered in [13]
to detect blue rectangular signs. In [9] a segmentation method in
both L-a-b and HSI color spaces is used to extract candidate blobs
for chromatic signs. At the same time, white signs are detected with
the help of an achromatic decomposition. Then a post-processing
step is performed in order to discard non-interest regions, to con-
nect fragmented signs, and to separate signs located at the same
post.
Another cue used to identify trafﬁc  signs is the geometric infor-
mation. Those shape-based algorithms are generally used directly
on scene images, or as a second step after color segmentation.
In [2,14,15] a corner detector is used to identify the shape infor-
mation. Maldonado et al. in [16] used a signature deﬁned  as the
distance from the mass center to the edge of the blob as a func-
tion of the angle to classify blobs as, triangles, squares, or circles.
Gavrilla et al. [6] used Distance Transform (DT) and Template
Matching (TM) to detect circular and triangular signs. Similarly,
Ruta et al. [4] used the Color Distance Transform, where a DT is
computed for every color channel separately. Larsson et al. [17]
used locally segmented contours combined with an implicit star-
shaped object model as prototypes for the different sign classes.
The contours are described by Fourier descriptors. Hough trans-
form is another technique employed to detect shapes. In [18] a
proprietary and undisclosed algorithm is used to detect rectangles,
and Hough Transform for the detection of circles. Loy and Zelinsky
[19] proposed a technique similar to Hough transform called fast
radial transform, which was successfully used for sign detection in
[14,20]. Many recent approaches use gradient orientation informa-
tion in the detection phase, for example, in [7], Edge Orientation
Histograms are computed over shape-speciﬁc  sub-regions of the
image.
After the localisation of region of interests ROIs, classiﬁcation
techniques employed to determine the content of the detected
trafﬁc  signs. Learning approaches are the most used techniques.
Maldonado et al. in [5] utilized different one-vs-all Support Vector
Machines (SVMs) with Gaussian kernel for each color and shape
classiﬁcation  to recognize signs. In [10] SVMs are used with HOG
features to carry out classiﬁcation  on candidate regions provided by
the interest region detectors. It withstand great appearance vari-
ations thanks to the robustness of local features, which typically
occur in outdoor data, especially dramatic illumination and scale
changes. In [12], the authors suggest a hinge loss stochastic gradi-
ent descent method to train convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
The method yields to high accuracy rates. However, a high com-
puting cost is paid to train the data. Lim et al. in [21] used also
Neural Networks (NNs), and improved their results by preselect-
ing the color-shape features using Principal Components Analysis
(PCA) and Fisher Linear Discriminant. Many other researchers use
Nearest Neighbour approaches to classify trafﬁc  signs. For example,
Kuo et al. in [15] used K-d tree to identify the content of the sign
and yields to high accuracy rates. In [13], the identiﬁcation  of signs
is carried out by a normalized correlation-based pattern matching
using a trafﬁc-sign  database.
In general, the quality of the results obtained by any study on
TSR varies from one research group to another. It is very difﬁcult
to decide which approach gives better overall results, mainly due
to the lack of a standard database of road images. It is not possible
to know, for example, how well the systems respond to changes in
illumination of the images since in the different studies it is usu-
ally not speciﬁed  whether images with low illumination have been
used in the experiments. Another disadvantage of the lack of a stan-
dardised database of road images is that some studies are based on
a small set of images since the compilation of a set of road scene
images is a very time-consuming task. The problem with work-
ing with such small data sets is that it is difﬁcult  to evaluate the
reliability of the results.
3. Proposed method
As depicted in Fig. 2, the proposed method is achieved in three
main steps. The ﬁrst  one segments the images to extract ROIs.
The second one detects the shapes from the ROIs. The last step
--- PAGE 3 ---
A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815  807
Fig. 2. Algorithm scheme.
Table 1
Threshold
 values used for the ROIs extraction.
Red Blue
Hue 0 ≤ H ≤ 10 Or 300 ≤ H ≤ 360 190 ≤ H ≤ 260
Saturation
 25 ≤ S ≤ 250 70 ≤ S ≤ 250
Intensity
 30 ≤ I ≤ 200 56 ≤ I ≤ 128
recognizes the information included in the detected trafﬁc  signs. In
this section, we detail each step of the proposed approach.
3.1. Segmentation
Color segmentation algorithms are inﬂuenced  by weather con-
dition, day time, shadows, orientation of objects in relation to the
sun and many other parameters [22]. These parameters change fre-
quently in dense urban area scenes. In addition, there are many
other objects in the street of the same color as trafﬁc  signs (red and
blue). Therefore, the color information is only used to generate ROIs
without performing classiﬁcation.
To overcome the difﬁculties  related to illumination changes and
possible deterioration of the signs, the HSI color space is used in
our system. Each image pixel is classiﬁed  according to its hue, sat-
uration, and intensity using selected thresholds for red and blue
colors. These thresholds were deduced from the analysis of the
histograms of hue, saturation, and intensity components corre-
sponding to the red and blue manually segmented signs. The signs
used to extract these histograms were collected from the German
Trafﬁc  Sign Detection Benchmark (GTSDB) data set. Here, the hue
takes values ranging from 0 to 360, the saturation S and intensity
I take values ranging from 0 to 255. The thresholds considered for
the segmentation step in the current paper are depicted in Table 1.
The thresholds mentioned in Table 1 allow to extract ROIs with
blue and red colors only. The achromatic decomposition can be used
Fig. 3. Binary patches of the possible sign shapes. (a) Triangular shape. (b) Circular
shape.
 (c) Rectangular shape.
to extract white ROIs (signs) from the images as it was done in [5]
and [23] according to
f (R, G, B) = (|R − G| + |G − B| + |B − R|)
3D (1)
where
 R, G, and B represent the brightness of the respective color.
D is the degree of extraction of an achromatic color. Referred to
[5], the best segmentation is provided with D = 20. Achromatic and
chromatic colors are represented by an f(R, G, B) less than 1 and an
f(R, G, B) greater than 1, respectively.
The segmentation step provides binary images where the ROIs
are represented with white pixels. Insigniﬁcant  ROIs are discarded
based on size and aspect ratio constraints. A ROI is considered as
signiﬁcant  if:
• its
 aspect ratio is between 1/1.9 and 1.9;
• the
 area covered by the ROI is between wh/25 and wh/3, where
w and h are the image width and height respectively.
The
 size (area of ROI) and aspect ratio thresholds are selected
empirically using collected images from the (GTSDB) data set.
3.2. Shape classiﬁcation
The approach used to classify shapes from extracted ROIs is
described in this section. Most of the methods available in the liter-
ature call some classiﬁers,  e.g. SVM, to detect the sign shape. Here,
a simple invariant geometric moments based method is used to
achieve shape classiﬁcation.  Invariant moments are introduced in
[24] where the famous Hu’s seven invariant geometric moments
were derived. Hu described his h1 to h6 moments as absolute
orthogonal invariants (independent of position, size, and orienta-
tion) and h7 as a skew orthogonal invariant (useful in distinguishing
mirror images). These features are capable of recognizing simple
objects.
The shapes need to be recognized are circles, triangles, and rec-
tangles. They are all simple objects and we believe the invariant
moments can help to recognize them perfectly. The ROIs are binary
patches to provide to our shape classiﬁcation  system. The invariant
moments are computed for each ROI and compared with those of
the target patches of the possible three shapes. Binary patches of
the different shapes are created as illustrated in Fig. 3. Note that
the octagonal shapes are considered belonging to the same shape
class as the circular ones.
Among the detected ROIs in the segmentation step, only those
having their moments close to those of the target shapes will
be considered as valid shape classes. Different metrics have been
tested to match the ROIs with the appropriate shape classes. The
metric used is deﬁned  as follows:
I(A, B) =
7∑
i=1
|mA
i − mB
i
| (2)
--- PAGE 4 ---
808 A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815
where mA
i and mB
i
are deﬁned  as follows:
mA
i
= sign(hA
i ) log |hA
i | (3)
mB
i
= sign(hB
i ) log |hB
i | (4)
where
 hA
i and hB
i
are the values of the Hu moments of the ROI and
the patch respectively.
The metric I will be used to ﬁnd  correspondences between the
detected ROIs and the patches in Fig. 3. After computing metrics
of the ROI over the three patches, the metric with the minimum
value indicate the class of the shape. Note that a ROI is rejected
if its corresponding metric value is above a threshold which was
empirically derived based on collected images from the (GTSDB)
data set.
3.3. Recognition
Once the candidate ROIs (blobs) are classiﬁed  into a shape class
they are provided to the recognition module in charge of identifying
the sign. Most of the road signs contain a pictogram, a string of char-
acters, or both. The recognition module is a classiﬁer  which should
be fed with features describing the signs to identify. Different clas-
siﬁers  as well as different features have been used in the literature.
To decide which classiﬁer  we will use in the proposed approach, the
Random Forest and SVM classiﬁers  have been tested on using differ-
ent features. Once the classiﬁer  is selected, different features have
been considered such as Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG),
Local Binary Pattern (LBP), and Local Self-Similarity (LSS). Firstly,
all the features have been tried independently with the Random
Forests classiﬁer.  Secondly, combinations between those features
have been used to create new ones.
In the following, overviews of the Random Forest classiﬁer,  SVM
classiﬁer,  and the features used to test these classiﬁers  are given.
The method followed to decide which feature to be used is detailed
and the recognition system is deduced from the comparison results.
3.3.1. Random forests
Random
 forests have received increasing interest because they
can be more accurate and robust to noise than single classiﬁers
[25,26]. It consists of an arbitrary number of simple trees, where
the ﬁnal  predicted class for a test object is the mode of the predic-
tions of all individual trees [27]. A Random Forest is an ensemble of
classiﬁcation  trees, where each tree contributes with a single vote
for the assignment of the most frequent class to the input data. It
adds an additional layer of randomness to bagging. In addition to
constructing each tree using a different bootstrap sample of the
data, Random Forests change how the classiﬁcation  or regression
trees are constructed. In standard trees, each node is split using
the best split among all variables. In a Random Forest, each node is
split using the best among a subset of predictors randomly chosen
at that node. This somewhat counterintuitive strategy turns out to
perform very well compared to many other classiﬁers,  and is robust
against over-ﬁtting  [27]. Another advantage of Random Forests is
their ease of use in the sense that they have only two parameters,
e.g. the number of variables in the random subset at each node and
the number of trees in the forest. The Random forests are not very
sensitive to the values of the two parameters.
3.3.2. Support vector machine (SVMs)
SVMs were introduced ﬁrst  by Vapnik [28] and some extensive
introductions were presented later in [29]. SVM attempts to sepa-
rate the positive samples from negative ones. Each sample should
be represented by a vector of dimension n. The basic concept of SVM
is to transform the input vectors to a higher dimensional space by a
nonlinear transform, and then an hyperplane which separates the
Fig. 4. The SVM binary classiﬁcation.
data can be found. This hyperplane should have the best general-
ization capability. As shown in Fig 4, the black circles and the white
circles are the training data set which belong to two classes. The
hyperplane H that separates the positive samples from the nega-
tive ones is found, ensuring that the margin between the closest
positives and negatives is maximal. Hyperplanes H1 and H2 are
the border of each class. The data located on H1 and H2 are called
support vectors.
SVM is designed to solve binary classiﬁcation  problems. Solving
multi-classes problems is accomplished through combinations of
binary classiﬁcation  problems. There are two ways to achieve that
such us one-vs.-one or one-vs.-all.
3.3.3.
 Feature extraction
Here, the features used in the recognition step such as HOG, LBP
and LSS are presented. A comparison is done to decide which of
those features will be used in the signs recognition problem.
HOG features was proposed by Navneet Dalal and Bill Triggs
in [30] for pedestrian detection. Motivated by its success in pedes-
trian detection, HOG features used to recognize trafﬁc  sign in many
recent works [11,25,10]. The basic idea of HOG features is that the
local object appearance and shape can often be characterized rather
well by the distribution of the local intensity gradients or edge
directions, even without precise knowledge of the corresponding
gradient or edge positions.
In this work, we propose to extend HOG features to HSI color
space. Instead of computing those features from grayscale images,
we do compute them from HSI color images.
To compute the HOG features, we normalize the window
detected in the previous stage to 40 × 40. The normalized window
is divided into 8 × 8 overlapping blocks, which gives a total num-
ber of 49 blocks. Each one of these blocks is divided into 2 × 2 cells
with 5 × 5 pixels. The gradient histogram with 9 bins is computed
at each cell. At each HSI channel, a 1764 HOG vector is computed.
The HOG vector corresponding to the HSI space, named HSI-HOG,
is deduced by concatenating the three vectors obtained at each HSI
channel. This results in a 5292 HSI-HOG vector. Fig. 5 illustrates
how the HSI-HOG features are computed.
The second feature involved in our experiments is the LBP. It is
a texture descriptor which was introduced in [31]. The concept of
LBP feature vector is similar to the one of the HOG features. The
window is divided into cells. For each pixel in a cell, we compare
the center pixel value to the neighboring ones and considering the
result as a binary number. Then compute the histogram, over the
cell, of the frequency of each number occurring, and normalize it
to obtain histograms of all cells. This gives the features vector for
the window.
--- PAGE 5 ---
A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815  809
Fig. 5. An example on how the HSI-HOG descriptor is computed.
HOG performs poorly when the background is cluttered with
noisy edge points
 [31]. The concatenation between the HOG and
LBP
 features, to create new features called HOG+LBP, allows to
reduce the effect of the noise on the recognition results. Given that
the result obtained by HSI-HOG is better than the classic grayscale
HOG, the concatenation
 HSI-HOG with LBP, named HSI-HOG+LBP,
is used instead of HOG+LBP.
LSS [32] is the third feature adopted in the current paper. Gen-
erally in LSS, the selected image is partitioned into smaller cells
which, conveniently compared with a patch located at the image
center. The resulting distance surface is normalized and projected
into the space intervals partitioned by the number of angle inter-
vals and radial intervals. The maximum value in an interval space
would be considered as the value of the feature. LSS has four pri-
mary parameters: the size of image, the radius of window, the
interval radius of image patches and angle interval. These parame-
ters are closely associated with each other. In our implementation
we used 3 × 3 patches, correlated against a surrounding windows
with radius equal to 10. Our log-polar coordinates was partitioned
into 80 bins (20 angles and 4 radial intervals). LSS features was con-
catenated with the HSI-HOG features to form a descriptor, named
HSI-HOG+LSS. This descriptor is used by a classiﬁer  to recognize
trafﬁc  signs.
In this work, we compared many features to ﬁgure  out which
ones give the best results. First, a simple HOG on grayscale image
is used, then we tried to use HOG on color image: we computed
the HOG features for the three channels of the HSI color image, and
concatenate these features to form HSI-HOG features. Moreover,
we combine the HSI-HOG features with the LBP features to form an
augmented feature vector. This combination is used successfully
to detect humans in [33]. We also used the combination HSI-HOG
with LSS features to form another feature vector.
The ROIs provided by the shape classiﬁcation  step are normal-
ized to 40 × 40. For each normalized ROI, the HOG descriptor for
the three channels Hue, Saturation, and Intensity are computed.
The so-called HSI-HOG is created by concatenating the HOGs of the
three HSI channels.
 The ﬁnal  HSI-HOG+LSS vector is feed to random
forests
 classiﬁer  to classify the detected shapes.
4. Experimental results
This section presents the results obtained by the proposed
approach. Evaluation of the classiﬁers  as well as the features pre-
sented in Section 3.3.3 are presented to justify the choice of the
proposed system. All the tests were performed on the public GTSRB,
GTSDB [34], and the STS data sets [35] using a 2.7 GHz Intel i5 pro-
cessor. A comparison with the state-of-the-art methods is given to
assess the performance of the new method.
4.1. Data sets
The public available data sets called German Trafﬁc  Sign
Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB), German Trafﬁc  Sign Detection
Benchmark (GTSDB), and Swedish Trafﬁc  Signs (STS) are adopted
for the performance evaluation. The GTSRB data set contains 51,839
German trafﬁc  signs in 43 classes (39,209 training images and
12,630 test images). These 43 classes of trafﬁc  signs have been
divided into six subsets: speed limit, other prohibitory, derestric-
tion, mandatory, danger, and unique signs Fig. 6. The GTSDB data
set provides 900 full images (600 for training, 300 for testing).
The STS data set contains more than 20000 images in which 20%
of the images are labeled. It contains 3488 trafﬁc  signs recorded
from more than 350 km of Swedish roads.
For the evaluation of the detection stage (segmentation and
shape classiﬁcation),  we used both GTSDB and STS data sets. The
GTSRB data set will be used to compare our recognition module
with other state-of-the-art methods.
--- PAGE 6 ---
810 A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815
Fig. 6. Subsets of trafﬁc  signs in the GTSRB data set. (a) Speed limit signs. (b) Other prohibitory signs. (c) Derestriction signs. (d) Mandatory signs. (e) Danger signs. And (f)
unique
 signs.
4.2. Segmentation
 and shape classiﬁcation
In the following of the paper, we refer to shape detection stage
as the segmentation step followed by the shape classiﬁcation  one
of the proposed method for trafﬁc  sign detection and recogni-
tion. To evaluate the detection stage, we used two different data.
The ﬁrst  one is formed from 300 images of the GTSDB data set.
The second one contains 5000 images of the STS data set. All
the images were normalized to 640 × 480 pixels using bilinear
interpolation.
Fig. 7(a) shows an example among images used to test the pro-
posed detection approach. The corresponding segmentation results
with and without using size and aspect ratio constraints are illus-
trated in Figs. 7(b) and (c), respectively. Referred to these Figs, some
regions are discarded as non-interest objects according to their size
and aspect ratio. Therefore, the detection process can be reduced as
the number of ROIs is reduced. The segmentation method succeeds
to detect the road sign present in Fig. 7(a) among the extrcated ROIs
in Fig. 7(c). However, some ROIs have been detected even they do
not represent road signs.
The shape
 classiﬁcation  method has been applied to the three
ROIs in Fig. 7(c). The moments invariants of the extracted ROIs have
been computed and matched to those of the models in Fig. 3 based
on the metric depicted in 2. Fig. 7(d) shows the shape classiﬁcation
results. The appropriate shape has been assigned to the ﬁrst  ROI,
which is classiﬁed  as circular. No shapes have been assigned to
the two other ROIs. Fig. 7(e) shows the ﬁnal  detection results by
proposed detection method. Red bounding box represents detected
region of trafﬁc  sign.
A correct detected sign is considered true positive if the cor-
responding bounding box overlaps with at least 50% of the area
covered by the right trafﬁc  sign present in the image. The evaluation
of the detection stage is performed based on precision–recall  curve,
where the recall and precision values are computed as follows:
recall = number of correctly detected signs
number of true signs × 100 (5)
precision = number of correctly detected signs
number of detected signs × 100 (6)
Fig. 7. An example of the results obtained by the detection stage. (a) Original image. (b) Segmentation results. (c) Segmentation results after taking account the aspect ratio
and
 the size. (d) Shape classiﬁcation  results. And (e) sign detection results.
--- PAGE 7 ---
A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815  811
Fig. 8. Precision–recall  curves of the proposed detection approach when applied to
(a)
 GTSDB and (b) STS data sets.
Table 2
The
 best trade-off between the recall and precision values as well as the AUC
obtained
 by the detection method on the GTSDB and STS data sets.
Recall Precision AUC
GTSDB data set 91.07% 90.13% 93.69%
STS
 data set 93.27% 90.27% 94.05%
The precision–recall  curves of the proposed method when
applied to GTSDB and STS data sets are depicted in Fig. 8(a) and
(b), respectively. The best trade-off between the recall and preci-
sion values as well as the Area Under Curve (AUC) of both data sets
used are listed in Table 2. It can be seen that the method yields
the best results with recall of 91.07% at a precision of 90.13% on
the GTSDB and recall of 93.27% at a precision of 90.27% on the STS.
The AUC of the two precision–recall  curves are 93.69% and 94.05%,
respectively.
More detection results are illustrated in Fig. 9. The ﬁrst  two of
the same ﬁgure  depicts the test images. The corresponding seg-
mentation results without and with taking account the size and
aspect ratio are illustrated in the second and third rows of Fig. 9,
Fig. 9. Example of detection results. (a) and (b) Original images. (c) and (d) Seg-
mentation
 results. (e) and (f) segmentation results after taking account the size and
aspect
 ratio constraints. (g) and (h) shape classiﬁcation  results. (i) and (j) detection
results.
respectively. We can remark from Figs. 9(e) and (f) how the num-
ber of insigniﬁcant  ROIs is reduced. The numbers of ROIs retained
from Figs. 9(e) and (f) are 3 and 4, respectively. Among those ROIs
only one ROI at each image is considered as a candidate sign (classi-
ﬁed  as a valid shape). The other ROIs were discarded and will not be
processed in the recognition step. The ROIs classiﬁed  as valid shapes
are shown in Figs. 9(g) and (h). The classiﬁed  ROI are depicted on the
corresponding test images by the means of green bounding boxes
in Figs 9(i) and (j).
4.3. Recognition
To evaluate the recognition stage, we used the training and the
testing GTSRB data sets. A comparison between features and clas-
siﬁers  used in the system is performed. The proposed recognition
approach is compared to the state-of-the-art works to assess its
performances.
--- PAGE 8 ---
812 A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815
Fig. 10. The average classiﬁcation  accuracy of the random forest classiﬁer  with
different features.
Table 3
Performance
 of each feature descriptor on GTSRB data set.
Feature CCRs(%) of all
road
 signs
CCRs(%)
 of
 each subset
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f)
HOG 96.11 95.61 98.32 88.15 98.05 94.08 98.14
HSI− HOG
 96.73 96.09 99.18 88.24 99.02 94.39 99.08
HSI− HOG+LBP
 97.06 96.28 99.31 89.23 99.31 95.21 99.03
HSI− HOG+LSS
 97.43 96.58 99.15 89.47 99.33 96.37 99.19
Table 4
The
 CCR and the average running time of the classiﬁers  used in this work.
Feature CCRs(%) of all subsets Run time (ms/frame)
Random forest SVM Random forest SVM
HOG 96.11 95.93 21.24 46.18
HSI-HOG
 96.73 96.29 28.51 51.96
HSI-HOG+LBP
 97.06 96.72 29.75 53.87
HSI-HOG+LSS
 97.43 96.91 28.93 53.12
The parameters
 of the classiﬁers  and features used in the system
are obtained from cross-validation experiments achieved on the
training data set,
 which we divide into a training and validation sub-
sets. Training and testing the classiﬁers  on the two subsets, using
different parameters
 settings, allows us to select the classiﬁers  and
features parameters that maximize the validation accuracy. The
classiﬁers  are trained again, using the selected parameters, on the
GTSRB training data set.
In this work, we used a Random Forest with 100 variables and
750 trees. The classiﬁcation  accuracy increases with the number of
trees and becomes constant as this number reaches the value 750
(see Fig. 10). Therefore, 750 is chosen for the number of trees to be
used in the Random Forest classiﬁer.
Table 3 shows Correct Classiﬁcation  Rates (CCRs) provided by
Random forests classiﬁer  by applying the proposed recognition
method to the GTSRB data set, which is composed of six subsets
as illustrated in Fig. 6. The CCR is computed independently for each
subset and for the whole road signs of the GTSRB data set. Different
features have been used such as HOG, HSI− HOG, HSI− HOG+LBP
and HSI− HOG+LSS. We remark from the table that the color cue
improves the classiﬁcation  performance, e.g. HSI− HOG features
give better results than the grayscale HOG in term of CCR. The
recognition results improved more when the HSI− HOG is com-
bined with LBP or LSS features. The HSI− HOG provides a higher
CCR when combined with LSS rather than LBP.
Table 4 gives a comparison between SVM with radial basis func-
tion (RBF) kernel, C = 7 and G = 0.09 and Random Forest in the terms
of CCR and running time. It is obvious from the table that the Ran-
dom Forest classiﬁer  provides accurate results with less running
Table 5
Comparison
 between the proposed recognition method and other published meth-
ods
 using the GTSRB data set.
Method CCR (%)
Committee of CNNs [36] 99.46
Multi-scale
 CNNs [37] 98.31
The
 proposed Method 97.43
Random
 forests [25] 96.14
LDA
 on HOG2 [38] 95.68
time when compared to the SVM classiﬁer.  That’s why, we have
adopted in the proposed recognition method the Random Forest
classiﬁer  together with the HSI− HOG+LSS features.
A comparison against some state-of-the-art works is presented
to assess the performances of the new method. Such a comparison
has been done with the methods presented in [36,37,25,38] when
those methods have been tested on the GTSRB data set as we have
done for the new method. The classiﬁcation  accuracies obtained by
the proposed method as well as the earlier proposed methods are
depicted in Table 5.
The methods presented in [36,37] use convolutional neural
networks to perform the recognition. The Random Forest together
with HOG features have been used in [25]. The last approach
included in the table performs the recognition based on Linear
Discriminant Analysis (LDA) with HOG features. We remark from
the table that the committee of CNNs and Multi-scale CNNs-based
approaches provides best accuracies compared to our approach.
The accuracies for the two methods as well as the new one are
99.46%, 98.31% and 97.43%, respectively. However, a high comput-
ing cost is paid for both methods to train the data set which makes
them computationally very demanding. The proposed method is
more accurate compared to the method in [25] and the LDA-based
method for which the classiﬁcation  accuracies are 96.14% and
95.68%, respectively. The computational cost of the three methods
is much lower than the CNNs-based methods.
There are many differences between the method presented in
this work and the one presented in [25]. The authors in [25] used
color enhancement in the RGB color space to detect signs. How-
ever, in our work, we used color thresholding in the HSI color
space in order to overcome illumination problems. Moreover, we
used invariant geometric moments to classify ROIs provided by the
color segmentation process. This allowed us to eliminate blobs with
insigniﬁcant  shapes. In the recognition stage, the authors in [25]
used a grayscale-based HOG features with a Random Forests of 500
trees. However, in our work, we computed HOG features using the
HSI color space. Then, we combined these features with LSS fea-
tures to get our ﬁnal  descriptor which was feed to Random Forests
of 750 trees. Using both color and texture based features in our
recognition module allowed us to obtain better results in the term
of classiﬁcation  accuracy compared to the one in [25].
4.4. Entire system
The last evaluation setup was to test the performance of the
entire detection and recognition system.
The GTSDB data set will be used to test the performances of the
whole system (detection and recognition). The GTSRB data set is
composed from training and testing data sets. The training data
set includes only images for correct road signs. In our algorithm,
each shape detected should be classiﬁed  as road sign if it is among
the road signs included in the training database. if not, it will be
classiﬁed  as no road sign. To be useful for our method, some false
positives should be added to the training database. Some images
without road signs have been collected from different road scenes
and added to training database. The proposed classiﬁer  has been
--- PAGE 9 ---
A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815  813
trained using the new training database and has been tested on the
GTSDB database.
Fig. 11 shows the precision–recall  curve obtained by the new
method for trafﬁc  sign detection and recognition. It achieves 94.21%
AUC on an average run time of 8-10 frames per second. We remark
that the AUC has been improved compared to the one we have
obtained the detection stage, which is 93.69%. This can be justiﬁed
by the reduction of the false positives in the recognition stage.
Figs. 12, 13 and 14 illustrate examples of recognition results
when the proposed approach applied to images of various trafﬁc
environments. In Fig. 12, the trafﬁc  signs contained in the images
have been successfully detected and recognized. In Fig. 13(a) and
(b), the road signs were too far to be detected. After the color
segmentation, they were discarded because they were not meet-
ing the size constraint. In Fig. 13(c) and (d), the signs color in the
images was changed due to the shadows. Consequently, the ROIs
corresponding to the signs were not extracted by the segmenta-
tion method. In Fig. 14, the trafﬁc  signs contained in the images
 Fig. 11. Precision–recall  curves of the proposed detection and recognition method.
Fig. 12. Detection and recognition results.
Fig. 13. Examples of recognition with misdetection.
--- PAGE 10 ---
814 A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815
Fig. 14. Examples of recognition with confused classiﬁcation.
have been successfully detected. However, the system could not
recognize them due to the motion blur in the signs.
5. Conclusion and perspectives
In this paper, a three stages system for real-time Trafﬁc  Sign
Detection and Recognition has been presented. The ﬁrst  stage
segments the images into ROIs based on color information. Only
signiﬁcant  ROIs will be considered referred to their size and aspect
ratio constraints. In the second stage, the circular, rectangular and
triangular shapes are detected using invariant geometric moments.
In the recognition stage, we combine the HOG features computed in
the HSI color space with LSS features to form a new descriptor. The
Random Forest classiﬁer  is used with this descriptor to recognize
the detected shapes. The entire system achieves 94.21% AUC on the
GTSDB data set at a processing rate of 8–10  frames/s. In the future
work, we are planning to use adaptive thresholding to overcome the
color segmentation problems. On the other hand, temporal infor-
mation could also be integrated to track the detected trafﬁc  signs
and reinforce the decision making process. This would also allow
us to restrict the search space in the current image considering
previous detections information, which can accelerate the candi-
date detection. Moreover, the feature selection can be employed to
accelerate the recognition phase by reducing the size of the descrip-
tor vectors. Further, this could be combined with other classiﬁers,
such as the Neural Networks.
References
[1] M.S. Prieto, A.R. Allen, Using self-organising maps in the detection and recog-
nition of road signs, Image Vis. Comput. 27 (6) (2009) 673–683.
[2] A. De La Escalera, L.E. Moreno, M.A. Salichs, J.M. Armingol, Road trafﬁc  sign
detection and classiﬁcation,  IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 44 (6) (1997) 848–859.
[3] M. Bénallal, J. Meunier, Real-time color segmentation of road signs, in: Canadian
Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering, IEEE CCECE 2003, Vol. 3,
IEEE, 2003, pp. 1823–1826.
[4] A. Ruta, Y. Li, X. Liu, Real-time trafﬁc  sign recognition from video by class-
speciﬁc  discriminative features, Pattern Recogn. 43 (1) (2010) 416–430.
[5] S. Maldonado-Bascón, S. Lafuente-Arroyo, P. Gil-Jimenez, H. Gómez-Moreno, F.
López-Ferreras, Road-sign detection and recognition based on support vector
machines, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 8 (2) (2007) 264–278.
[6] D.M. Gavrila, Multi-feature hierarchical template matching using distance
transforms, in: Fourteenth International Conference on Pattern Recognition,
Proceedings, vol. 1, IEEE, 1998, pp. 439–444.
[7] B. Alefs, G. Eschemann, H. Ramoser, C. Beleznai, Road sign detection from edge
orientation histograms, in: Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, IEEE, IEEE, 2007,
pp. 993–998.
[8] A. Ellahyani, M.E. Ansari, A three stages system for trafﬁc  sign detection and
recognition, in:
 Third World Conference on Complex Systems (WCCS), IEEE,
2015, p. 115.
[9] J. Lillo-Castellano, I. Mora-Jiménez, C. Figuera-Pozuelo, J. Rojo-Álvarez, Trafﬁc
sign segmentation and classiﬁcation  using statistical learning methods, Neu-
rocomputing 153 (2015)
 286–299.
[10] S. Salti, A. Petrelli, F. Tombari, N. Fioraio, L. Di Stefano, Trafﬁc  sign detection via
interest region extraction, Pattern Recogn. 48 (4) (2015) 1039–1049.
[11] C. Yao, F. Wu, H.-j. Chen, X.-l. Hao, Y. Shen, Trafﬁc  sign recognition using hog-
svm
 and grid search, in: 12th International Conference on Signal Processing
(ICSP), IEEE, 2014, pp. 962–965.
[12] J. Jin, K. Fu, C. Zhang, Trafﬁc  sign recognition with hinge loss trained con-
volutional neural networks, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems
 15 (5) (2014) 1991–2000.
[13] J. Miura, T. Kanda, Y. Shirai, An active vision system for real-time trafﬁc  sign
recognition, in: Intelligent Transportation Systems, Proceedings, IEEE, IEEE,
2000, pp. 52–57.
[14] C.F. Paulo, P.L. Correia, Automatic detection and classiﬁcation  of trafﬁc  signs, in:
Eighth International Workshop on Image Analysis for Multimedia Interactive
Services, WIAMIS’07, IEEE, 2007, p. 11.
[15] W.-J. Kuo, C.-C. Lin, Two-stage road sign detection and recognition, in: IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, IEEE, 2007, pp. 1427–1430.
[16] S.M. Bascón, J.A. Rodríguez, S.L. Arroyo, A.F. Caballero, F. López-Ferreras, An
optimization on pictogram identiﬁcation  for the road-sign recognition task
using SVMS, Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 114 (3) (2010) 373–383.
[17] F. Larsson, M. Felsberg, Using Fourier descriptors and spatial models for trafﬁc
sign recognition, in: Image Analysis, Springer, 2011, pp. 238–249.
[18] F. Moutarde, A. Bargeton, A. Herbin, L. Chanussot, Robust on-vehicle real-time
visual detection of American and European speed limit signs, with a modular
trafﬁc  signs
 recognition system, in: Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, IEEE, IEEE,
2007, pp. 1122–1126.
[19] G. Loy, A. Zelinsky, Fast radial symmetry for detecting points of interest,
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 25 (8) (2003)
959–973.
[20] G. Loy, N. Barnes, Fast shape-based road sign detection for a driver assistance
system, in: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems, (IROS 2004), Proceedings, vol. 1, IEEE, 2004, pp. 70–75.
[21] K.H. Lim, K.P. Seng, L.M. Ang, Intra color-shape classiﬁcation  for trafﬁc  sign
recognition, in: International Computer Symposium (ICS), IEEE, 2010, pp.
642–647.
[22] B. Soheilian, N. Paparoditis, B. Vallet, Detection and 3d reconstruction of trafﬁc
signs from multiple view color images, ISPRS J. Photogr. Remote Sens. 77 (2013)
1–20.
[23] H. Liu, D. Liu, J. Xin, Real-time recognition of road trafﬁc  sign in motion image
based on genetic algorithm, in: International Conference on Machine Learning
and Cybernetics, Proceedings, vol. 1, IEEE, 2002, pp. 83–86.
[24] M.-K. Hu, Visual pattern recognition by moment invariants, IRE Trans. Inf. The-
ory 8 (2) (1962) 179–187.
[25] F. Zaklouta, B. Stanciulescu, Real-time trafﬁc-sign  recognition using tree clas-
siﬁers,  IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 13 (4) (2012) 1507–1514.
[26] X. Qingsong, S. Juan, L. Tiantian, A detection and recognition method for prohi-
bition trafﬁc  signs, in: International Conference on Image Analysis and Signal
Processing (IASP), IEEE, 2010, pp. 583–586.
[27] L. Breiman, Random forests, Mach. Learn. 45 (1) (2001) 5–32.
[28] V.N. Vapnik, V. Vapnik, Statistical Learning Theory, Vol. 1, Wiley, New York,
1998.
--- PAGE 11 ---
A. Ellahyani et al. / Applied Soft Computing 46 (2016) 805–815  815
[29] N. Christiannini, J. Shawe-Taylor, Support Vector Machines and other Kernel-
Based Learning Methods, 2000.
[30] N. Dalal, B. Triggs, Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection, in:
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, CVPR, vol. 1, IEEE, 2005, pp. 886–893.
[31] T. Ojala, M. Pietikä inen, D. Harwood, A comparative study of texture meas-
ures with classiﬁcation  based on featured distributions, Pattern Recogn. 29 (1)
(1996) 51–59.
[32] E. Shechtman, M. Irani, Matching local self-similarities across images and
videos, in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
CVPR’07, IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–8.
[33] H. Wang, M.M. Ullah, A. Klaser, I. Laptev, C. Schmid, Evaluation of local spatio-
temporal features for action recognition, in: BMVC 2009-British Machine Vision
Conference, BMVA Press, 2009, pp. 124–131.
[34] http://benchmark.ini.rub.de/.
[35] https://www.cvl.isy.liu.se/research/datasets/trafﬁc-signs-dataset/ .
[36] D. Ciresan, U. Meier, J. Masci, J. Schmidhuber, A committee of neural networks
for trafﬁc  sign classiﬁcation,  in: The 2011 International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 2011, pp. 1918–1921.
[37] P. Sermanet, Y. LeCun, Trafﬁc  sign recognition with multi-scale convolutional
networks, in: The 2011 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN), IEEE, 2011, pp. 2809–2813.
[38] J. Stallkamp, M. Schlipsing, J. Salmen, C. Igel, The German trafﬁc  sign recognition
benchmark: a multi-class classiﬁcation  competition, in: The 2011 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 2011, pp. 1453–1460.